HADOOP-16202. Enhance openFile() for better read performance against object stores (#2584)
apache/hadoop: hadoop-common-project/hadoop-common/src/site/markdown/filesystem/fsdatainputstreambuilder.md

the name value of the path supplied to the  `openFile(path)` call.

Filesystems MUST NOT validate the rest of the path.
This is needed to support viewfs and other mount-point wrapper filesystems
where schemas and paths are different. These often create their own FileStatus results

Preconditions

```python
status == null or status.getPath().getName() == path.getName()

```

Filesystems MUST NOT require the class of `status` to equal
that of any specific subclass their implementation returns in filestatus/list
operations. This is to support wrapper filesystems and serialization/deserialization
of the status.

### Set optional or mandatory parameters

    FutureDataInputStreamBuilder opt(String key, ...)
    FutureDataInputStreamBuilder must(String key, ...)

Set optional or mandatory parameters to the builder. Using `opt()` or `must()`,
client can specify FS-specific parameters without inspecting the concrete type
of `FileSystem`.

Example:

```java
out = fs.openFile(path)
    .must("fs.option.openfile.read.policy", "random")
    .opt("fs.http.connection.timeout", 30_000L)
    .withFileStatus(statusFromListing)
    .build()
    .get();
```

> Here the seek policy of `random` has been specified,

Reviewer: Now the terminology is "read policy".

operations. This is to support wrapper filesystems and serialization/deserialization
of the status.

### Set optional or mandatory parameters

    FutureDataInputStreamBuilder opt(String key, ...)
    FutureDataInputStreamBuilder must(String key, ...)

Set optional or mandatory parameters to the builder. Using `opt()` or `must()`,
client can specify FS-specific parameters without inspecting the concrete type
of `FileSystem`.

Example:

```java
out = fs.openFile(path)
    .must("fs.option.openfile.read.policy", "random")
    .opt("fs.http.connection.timeout", 30_000L)
    .withFileStatus(statusFromListing)
    .build()
    .get();
```

Here the read policy of `random` has been specified,
with the requirement that the filesystem implementation must understand the option.
An http-specific option has been supplied which may be interpreted by any store;
If the filesystem opening the file does not recognize the option, it can safely be
ignored.

### When to use `opt()` versus `must()`

The difference between `opt()` versus `must()` is how the FileSystem opening
the file must react to an option which it does not recognize.

> * `opt(name, value)`: if `name` is not reco

Reviewer 2: I think some typo here at the end.

Author: cut the line

This is critical to ensure safe use of the feature: directory listing/
status serialization/deserialization can result result in the `withFileStatus()`

> argument not being the custom subclass returned by the Filesystem instance's

Reviewer 3: line above, `result result`

own `getFileStatus()`, `listFiles()`, `listLocatedStatus()` calls, etc.

In such a situation the implementations must:

1. Verify that `status.getPath().getName()` matches the current `path.getName()`
   value. The rest of the path MUST NOT be validated.
1. Use any status fields as desired -for example the file length.

> Even if not values of the status are used, the presence of the argument

Reviewer 3: "none of the values"?

```suggestion
Even if none of the values of the status are used, the presence of the argument
```

The `build()` operation MAY perform the validation of the file's existence,
its kind, so rejecting attempts to read from a directory or non-existent
file. Alternatively
* file existence/status checks MAY be performed asynchronously within the returned
    `CompletableFuture<>`.
* file existence/status checks MAY be postponed until the first byte is read in
  any of the read such as `read()` or `PositionedRead`.

That is, the precondition  `exists(FS, path)` and `isFile(FS, path)` are
only guaranteed to have been met after the `get()` called on returned future
and an attempt has been made to read the stream.

> Thus, if even when file does not exist, or is a directory rather than a file,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thus, even when the file does not exist, or it's a directory rather than a file,
```

the following call MUST succeed, returning a `CompletableFuture` to be evaluated.

```java
Path p = new Path("file://tmp/file-which-does-not-exist");

CompletableFuture<FSDataInputStream> future = p.getFileSystem(conf)
      .openFile(p)
      .build();
```

> The inability to access/read a file MUST raise an `IOException`or subclass

Reviewer 3: typo: missing space

```suggestion
The inability to access/read a file MUST raise an `IOException` or subclass
```

in either the future's `get()` call, or, for late binding operations,
when an operation to read data is invoked.

Therefore the following sequence SHALL fail when invoked on the
`future` returned by the previous example.

```java
  future.get().read();
```

Access permission checks have the same visibility requirements: permission failures
MUST be delayed until the `get()` call and MAY be delayed into subsequent operations.

Note: some operations on the input stream, such as `seek()` may not attempt any IO

> at all. Such operations MAY NOT raise exceotions when interacting with

Reviewer 3: exceotions -> exceptions

```suggestion
at all. Such operations MAY NOT raise exceptions when interacting with
```

nonexistent/unreadable files.

## <a name="options"></a> Standard `openFile()` options since Hadoop 3.3.3

These are options which `FileSystem` and `FileContext` implementation

> MUST expected to recognise and MAY support by changing the behavior of

Reviewer 2: typo: MUST be. Why are we putting a MUST recognise constraint..as it is a new api altogether?

Author: API is not new; in 3.3.0, and the createFile one has been around for longer. all we do here is declare some well known keys

> their input streams as a appropriate.

Reviewer 2: type: remove "a"

Hadoop 3.3.0 added the `openFile()` API; these standard options were defined in
a later release. Therefore, although they are "well known", unless confident that
the application will only be executed against releases of Hadoop which knows of
the options -applications SHOULD set the options via `opt()` calls rather than `must()`.

When opening a file through the `openFile()` builder API, callers MAY use
both `.opt(key, value)` and `.must(key, value)` calls to set standard and
filesystem-specific options.

> If set as an `opt()` parameter, unsupported "standard" options MUST be ignored,
> as MUST unrecognized standard options.

Reviewer 3: This might be a little clearer?

```suggestion
If set as an `opt()` parameter, both unsupported and unrecognized "standard" options MUST be ignored.
```

If set as a `must()` parameter, unsupported "standard" options MUST be ignored.
unrecognized standard options MUST be rejected.

The standard `openFile()` options are defined
in `org.apache.hadoop.fs.OpenFileOptions`; they all SHALL start
with `fs.option.openfile.`.

Note that while all `FileSystem`/`FileContext` instances SHALL support these
options to the extent that `must()` declarations SHALL NOT fail, the
implementations MAY support them to the extent of interpreting the values. This

> means that it is not a requirement for the stores to actually read the the read

Reviewer 2: typo: two "the" at the end.

> policy or file length values and use them when opening files.

Reviewer 3: double `the`

alternatively...

```suggestion
means that it is not a requirement for the stores to actually read and use the read
policy or file length values when opening files.
```

`io.file.buffer.size`.

It is supported by all filesystem clients which allow for stream-specific buffer
sizes to be set via `FileSystem.open(path, buffersize)`.

### <a name="read.policy"></a> Option: `fs.option.openfile.read.policy`

Declare the read policy of the input stream. This is a hint as to what the
expected read pattern of an input stream will be. This MAY control readahead,
buffering and other optimizations.

Sequential reads may be optimized with prefetching data and/or reading data in
larger blocks. Some applications (e.g. distCp) perform sequential IO even over
columnar data.

In contrast, random IO reads data in different parts of the file using a
sequence of `seek()/read()`
or via the `PositionedReadable` or `ByteBufferPositionedReadable` APIs.

Random IO performance may be best if little/no prefetching takes place, along
with other possible optimizations

Queries over columnar formats such as Apache ORC and Apache Parquet perform such
random IO; other data formats may be best read with sequential or whole-file
policies.

What is key is that optimizing reads for seqential reads may impair random

> performance -and vice versa.

Reviewer 2: typo: "-and"

Author: it;s really a hyphen &mtag;. so wontfix

1. The seek policy is a hint; even if declared as a `must()` option, the
   filesystem MAY ignore it.
1. The interpretation/implementation of a policy is a filesystem specific
   behavior -and it may change with Hadoop releases and/or specific storage
   subsystems.
1. If a policy is not recognized, the filesystem client MUST ignore it.

| Policy       | Meaning                                                  |
|--------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| `adaptive`   | Any adaptive policy implemented by the store.            |
| `default`    | The default policy for this store. Generally "adaptive". |

> | `random`     | Optimize for random acdess.                              |

Reviewer 3: typo: access

```suggestion
| `random`     | Optimize for random access.                              |
```

Performance.

*Tip:* log the `toString()` value of input streams at `DEBUG`. The S3A and ABFS
Input Streams log read statistics, which can provide insight about whether reads
are being performed efficiently or not.

_Futher reading_

* [Linux fadvise()](https://linux.die.net/man/2/fadvise).
* [Windows `CreateFile()`](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/fileapi/nf-fileapi-createfilea#caching-behavior)

#### <a name="read.policy."></a> Read Policy `adaptive`

Try to adapt the seek policy to the read pattern of the application.

The `normal` policy of the S3A client and the sole policy supported by
the `wasb:` client are both adaptive -they assume sequential IO, but once a
backwards seek/positioned read call is made the stream switches to random IO.

Other filesystem implementations may wish to adopt similar strategies, and/or
extend the algorithms to detect forward seeks and/or switch from random to
sequential IO if that is considered more efficient.

Adaptive read policies are the absence of the ability to
declare the seek policy in the `open()` API, so requiring it to be declared, if
configurable, in the cluster/application configuration. However, the switch from

> sequential to random seek policies may be exensive.

Reviewer 3: expensive?

```suggestion
sequential to random seek policies may be expensive.
```

When applications explicitly set the `fs.option.openfile.read.policy` option, if
they know their read plan, they SHOULD declare which policy is most appropriate.

#### <a name="read.policy.default"></a> Read Policy ``

The default policy for the filesystem instance.
Implementation/installation-specific.

#### <a name="read.policy.sequential"></a> Read Policy `sequential`

Expect sequential reads from the first byte read to the end of the file/until
the stream is closed.

#### <a name="read.policy.random"></a> Read Policy `random`

Expect `seek()/read()` sequences, or use of `PositionedReadable`
or `ByteBufferPositionedReadable` APIs.

#### <a name="read.policy.vector"></a> Read Policy `vector`

This declares that the caller intends to use the Vectored read API of
[HADOOP-11867](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HADOOP-11867)
_Add a high-performance vectored read API_.

This is a hint: it is not a requirement when using the API.

> It does inform the implemenations that the stream should be

Reviewer 3: implemenations -> implementations

```suggestion
It does inform the implementations that the stream should be
```

Strategies can include:

* Initiate an HTTP GET of the entire file in `openFile()` operation.
* Prefech data in large blocks, possibly in parallel read operations.

Applications which know that the entire file is to be read from an opened stream SHOULD declare this
read policy.

### <a name="openfile.length"></a> Option: `fs.option.openfile.length`

Declare the length of a file.

This can be used by clients to skip querying a remote store for the size
of/existence of a file when opening it, similar to declaring a file status
through the `withFileStatus()` option.

If supported by a filesystem connector, this option MUST be interpreted as
declaring the minimum length of the file:

1. If the value is negative, the option SHALL be considered unset.
2. It SHALL NOT be an error if the actual length of the file is greater than
   this value.
3. `read()`, `seek()` and positioned read calls MAY use a position across/beyond
   this length but below the actual length of the file. Implementations MAY
   raise `EOFExceptions` in such cases, or they MAY return data.

If this option is used by the FileSystem implementation

*Implementor's Notes*

> * A value of `fs.option.openfile.length` &lt; 0 MUST be rejected.

Reviewer 3: Implementations are recommended to reject < 0, but above we consider the option unset if negative.

If a negative length is supplied, should users expect it to be rejected or ignored?

* If a file status is supplied along with a value in `fs.opt.openfile.length`;
  the file status values take precedence.

> ### <a name="split.start"></a> Options: `fs.option.openfile.` and `fs.option.openfile.split.end`

Reviewer 3: missing `split.start`?

```suggestion
### <a name="split.start"></a> Options: `fs.option.openfile.split.start` and `fs.option.openfile.split.end`
```

Here is an example from a proof of
concept `org.apache.parquet.hadoop.util.HadoopInputFile`
reader which uses a (nullable) file status and a split start/end.

The `FileStatus` value is always passed in -but if it is null, then the split
end is used to declare the length of the file.

```java
protected SeekableInputStream newStream(Path path, FileStatus stat,
     long splitStart, long splitEnd)
     throws IOException {

   FutureDataInputStreamBuilder builder = fs.openFile(path)
   .opt("fs.option.openfile.read.policy", "vector, random")
   .withFileStatus(stat);

   builder.opt("fs.option.openfile.split.start", splitStart);
   builder.opt("fs.option.openfile.split.end", splitEnd);
   CompletableFuture<FSDataInputStream> streamF = builder.build();
   return HadoopStreams.wrap(FutureIO.awaitFuture(streamF));
}
```

As a result, whether driven directly by a file listing, or when opening a file
from a query plan of `(path, splitStart, splitEnd)`, there is no need to probe
the remote store for the length of the file. When working with remote object
stores, this can save tens to hundreds of milliseconds, even if such a probe is
done asynchronously.

> If both the file length and the split end is set, then the file length MUST be
> considered "more" authoritative, that is it really SHOULD be defining the file
> length. If the split end is set, the caller MAY ot read past it.

Reviewer 3: typo: ot?

Should it be dropped?

```suggestion
If both the file length and the split end is set, then the file length MUST be
considered "more" authoritative, that is it really SHOULD be defining the file
length. If the split end is set, the caller MAY read past it.
```

    "random");
```

### MapReduce input format propagating options

An example of a record reader passing in options to the file it opens.

```java
  public void initialize(InputSplit genericSplit,
                     TaskAttemptContext context) throws IOException {
    FileSplit split = (FileSplit)genericSplit;
    Configuration job = context.getConfiguration();
    start = split.getStart();
    end = start + split.getLength();
    Path file = split.getPath();

    // open the file and seek to the start of the split
    FutureDataInputStreamBuilder builder =
      file.getFileSystem(job).openFile(file);
    // the start and end of the split may be used to build
    // an input strategy.
    builder.opt("fs.option.openfile.split.start", start);
    builder.opt("fs.option.openfile.split.end", end);
    FutureIO.propagateOptions(builder, job,
        "mapreduce.job.input.file.option",
        "mapreduce.job.input.file.must");

    fileIn = FutureIO.awaitFuture(builder.build());
    fileIn.seek(start)
    /* Rest of the operation on the opened stream */
  }
```

### `FileContext.openFile`

From `org.apache.hadoop.fs.AvroFSInput`; a file is opened with sequential input.

> Because the file length has already been probed for, the length is passd down

Reviewer 3: passd -> passed

```suggestion
Because the file length has already been probed for, the length is passed down.
```
